Reactivity in itself is not
something that is that unique,
you've seen this in other frameworks,
but for Solid, it has a special role.
Basically armed with this tool, we can
do a lot more than state management.
I know we've been doing console logs and
you can maybe kind of picture,
you can put some global state in there and
trigger your components to rerender but
where a lot of the uniqueness all
comes in is I asked the question,
what if our renderer could
just be the reactive system?
Like what if we don't
need a virtual DOM or
any other kind of mechanism
to actually update our view?
Rech Harris, from Svelte, once famously
said that frameworks aren't
there to organize your code but
to organize your mind.
That was his saying and that's
actually how I feel about components
in the introduction I mentioned,
that components are kind of this
runtime overhead that doesn't
actually necessarily need to be.
And as I've mentioned before,
reactive libraries have had some
issues in the past, but luckily a lot
has happened in the last decade so,
even if you don't believe
me you don't have to.
We've seen this kind of natural evolution,
first with things like MobX ensuring
predictable execution using
topic graphical sorting.
They ensure that functions run exactly
when you expect them to run and
only run once.
And similarly,
the old system just kind of went crazy.
Like the one we implemented just now, like
you just update stuff, it just runs right
away, there's no batching, no scheduling
but we can learn from what others
have done and add the ability to schedule
when our side effects actually happen.
And finally,
even though we didn't implement this
in our reactive system,
the way we wrote it there,
that effect never goes away and
we don't want to manage all of that.
Classically, you'll find
in a lot of frameworks,
their createEffect actually
returns to dispose function and
you have to actually call dispose
manually if you want to get rid of it.
You don't see it a lot in stuff like MobX
because they tied into the component life
cycle but for us, one of the key
revelations came from a library called SJS
in which in the same way that we
implemented that cleanup in the last step,
it doesn't have to only
clean up dependencies,
it can actually clean up
child nested effects.
So whenever that reruns, we just can
automatically clean any children,
get rid of any nested effects or
computations and that way we get rid of
a lot of the ugly bookkeeping, basically
create a render with reactivity in
mind instead of just trying to apply
reactivity to an existing render.
I'll be talking in a moment about
scheduling here because I think many
people are familiar with React and
I think this will kind of help you
kind of map the model over, right?
Because React has kind of like
four stages of rendering.
And I'm not talking about initial render,
I'm talking about from
the point of view of an update.
You set state initially,
that's the event that comes in you know,
someone clicks a button or does something,
and then it runs the component tree.
It goes, okay, from here down,
I need to rerun the components.
And we've seen this expressed as like
view is a function of state, but
more specifically it's VDOM
is a function of state.
They create a virtual DOM representation
by rerendering all your components and
then they take that tree and
Diff it against another tree and
then apply the little updates that happen,
and
then once it's all done it runs
everyone's favorite function.
Solid's actually fairly
similar in that when the event
happens we call setSignal and
then the pure computation happens,
all the memos or derived values run and
then you as the end user
don't use these often but
our renderer actually uses something
called createRenderEffect,
which is essentially
an effect that's made for
updating the DOM during the rendering,
and then we run createEffect.
This kind of timeline is
actually very analogous.
It's the reason why we can do scheduling,
why we can do concurrent rendering,
why we can do basically everything that
a VDOM can do, it's because the scheduling
is actually almost the same
kind of concept But
I think this is another opportunity to get
into playing around with the code again.
I know we just did that but this is so
much easier to show than to explain so
this time, we're not going to be
creating the reactive system ourselves.
We're going to use Solid's
actual reactive system.
I'm going to go back into the playground,
and this time I'm going
to make a new one and
it's kind of funny to me and
it makes a lot of sense.
We always teach reactivity using
console logs like, Hello World, Hi.
And it's a good place to start as it
really makes the concept easy to see and
we see people doing it for
state updates, but
I want to do something a little
bit more substantial here.
So what I'm going to do is I'm
going to create a signal and
I'm going to import it
this time from Solid Js.
This time it actually being in
the playground is actually important.
Of course the playground is being fun.
Okay, there we go.
And I'm going to just make a variable.
I'm going to use count for, again, because
you're probably tired of counters by now,
but counters are used in these demos for
a reason because they're about the most
simple example you can come up with.
And this time when we create an effect,
what if instead of console
logging something,
we did something a little
bit more substantial?
And by that what I mean is,
let's pretend that I create an h1 element.
I'm going to use the most powerful
JavaScript framework here,
vanilla Js and I'm going to create an h1.
And because our effect can really
do anything I'm just going
to go h1.textcontent and
this is a real DOM node.
I'm going to just set
that text content to,
I don't know, the count is the count
whatever, okay, call our signal.
And I'm going to attach it to the DOM but
because of this environments
always rerunning, I'm actually
going to do a little hack here.
Without using Solid's imports I'm actually
going to clear the body every time
the thing updates.
It's not hugely important but
then we can append our h1 and
document.body and
we see the count is zero, okay?
Of course, this doesn't do very much so
maybe we should
actually update the count to
something else like the count is 1,
but this happens a little bit too fast,
right?
If I refresh this you're going to
be like okay, on the count it's 1.
This is happening immediately so
let's make some more DOM elements.
Let's make a button maybe, so
I'm going to go document.createElement,
button, all right?
And let's set the text for
that button like,
I know, click me and
then let's go button.onclick
equals a function, arrow function.
And I'm going to do setCount
equals count plus one, okay?
And then I'm going to get rid of this one.
And I guess we need to attach our button
to the DOM, so lets add the button.
Okay, sweet.
And if you're getting jQuery vibes here,
that's perfectly fine, but
we have a working counter, right?
All that's happening is every time we
click our button we're just calling
setCount, count plus one and
it's replacing the text in in here, right?
So yeah, using reactivity to update
the DOM is something that is
fairly simple to do,
you don't need a framework or anything.